# hu.dwim.sdl

## Fork

This is a fork of [hu.dwim.sdl](https://github.com/hu-dwim/hu.dwim.sdl). The
details are in the subsections below, but here's the summary:

- `hu.dwim.sdl.ffi` was removed in favor of separate packages, one for each sdl module.
- Everything is exported in the generated files.
- Generated names are lispy.
- Automatic boolean conversion and error checking of return values (where applicable).
- Convenience macros for working with structs and slots.

New dependencies: `cl-ppcre` for regexps and `parachute` for some tests.

Also, now, the generated files rely on stuff from the `hu.dwim.sdl` package. I
don't think this to be a big deal, though.

### Current spec file versions

<!-- 
(format nil "- SDL ~s.~s.~s~%- TTF ~s.~s.~s~%- GFX ~s.~s.~s~%- Image ~s.~s.~s~%"
        hu.dwim.sdl/core:+major-version+
        hu.dwim.sdl/core:+minor-version+
        hu.dwim.sdl/core:+patchlevel+
        hu.dwim.sdl/ttf:+ttf-major-version+
        hu.dwim.sdl/ttf:+ttf-minor-version+
        hu.dwim.sdl/ttf:+ttf-patchlevel+
        hu.dwim.sdl/gfx:+sdl2-gfx-primitives-major+
        hu.dwim.sdl/gfx:+sdl2-gfx-primitives-minor+
        hu.dwim.sdl/gfx:+sdl2-gfx-primitives-micro+
        hu.dwim.sdl/image:+image-major-version+
        hu.dwim.sdl/image:+image-minor-version+
        hu.dwim.sdl/image:+image-patchlevel+)
-->

- SDL 2.0.14
- TTF 2.0.15
- GFX 1.0.4
- Image 2.0.5

(note that you can generate the specs yourself if you want to)

### Packages

- `hu.dwim.sdl/core` -- bindings for SDL2,
- `hu.dwim.sdl/gfx` -- bindings for SDL2_gfx,
- `hu.dwim.sdl/ttf` -- bindings for SDL2_ttf,
- `hu.dwim.sdl/image` -- bindings for SDL_image,
- `hu.dwim.sdl` -- here reside the utilities for generation in addition to some
  high-level API that doesn't belong to any particular SDL package).

### Systems

- `hu.dwim.sdl` -- contains `hu.dwim.sdl` and `hu.dwim.sdl/core` packages.
- `hu.dwim.sdl/gfx`
- `hu.dwim.sdl/ttf`
- `hu.dwim.sdl/image`
 
### Naming

Instead of `|SDL_CreateWindow|` you now simply write `create-window`.  See
`ffi-name-transformer` in [name-translation](source/name-translation.lisp) for
details, but basically:
  - all underscores are replaced with dashes; 
  - camel case is converted to dashes; 
  - Abbreviations are treated nicely (such as `GL`, `GUID`, `RGBA` etc.);
  - all constants and enum members are braced with pluses, e.g. `+have-pow+`;
  - `SDL_`, `TTF_`, `GFX_`, `IMG_` prefixes are removed;
  - `_SDL_`, `_TTF_`, `_GFX_`, `_IMG_` prefixes are converted to `_`;
  - `SDLK_` prefix is converted to `K_`;
  - and these table substitutions take place: 
    - `SDL_log` -> `LOG*`
    - `SDL_PRIX64` -> `+PRI-X64*+`.

The *autogenerated* convenience macros/functions reside in the same package
with the rest of the generated code.  This means there's a possibility of name
clashes were SDL to introduce something that's named, say, `with-rect`. That, I
think, is very unlikely, but in case it happens, the name of the newly
introduced offending function will be renamed (suffixed, probably).

#### `<function-name>*`, `with-<smth>`, `with*<smth>`, `with-<smth>*` etc.

See the *Convenience macros and functions* for info on these.

#### **TODO** `%<original-function-name>`

It wouldn't be bad if CFFI could generate multiple functions per one C function,
or even simply give an option to include the original unmodified function but
with a custom name e.g. `init` and `%init`. This could be useful when one
doesn't want the overhead of conversion or error checking. Alternatively,
another file could be generated with its own CFFI options.
 
#### (maybe) `<function-name>-gc`

There aren't any GC additions so far, though.

### Exports

Everything is exported, except:

- [TTF] `get-font-kerning-size`, which is deprecated (use
  `get-font-kerning-size-glyphs` instead).
 
### Automatic Conversion and Error checking of Return Values

Functions in SDL2 return error codes, and there are several types.  They aren't
indicated in any way, other than on wiki, and that's what I did. Some were easy
to pick with regexps, others I looked through manually.  The assortment is
exhaustive and is meant to stay that way.

It should have been easier has [this
issue](https://bugzilla.libsdl.org/show_bug.cgi?id=3219) been resolved, filed
for the exact same purpose of this library, but it hasn't been.

The following expansions of return values take place:

- NULL signals an error
- certain enum value signals an error
- constant (such as 0) signals an error
- negative number signals an error
- string starts with something indicating an error
- bool-like value like `SDL_bool` and where `0` indicates false are converted to
  `nil` on `0` (equals `SDL_FALSE`) and `t` otherwise.
- same as above, but where false signals an error
 
These are fairly easy to add should there be more cases.

The values are expanded based on the actual return type of the function - the
expansion methods are defined at the time of return type name conversion and the
code with custom type details is inserted into the generated file, right before
the function definition in question.

Each function has it's own error condition: `<function-name>-error` and it is
exported.  All error conditions inherit from `hu.dwim.sdl:sdl-error`. The actual
errors are quite informative, naming the return value, its type, and showing
the `SDL_GetError` output.

Finding out if a function does any error checking / conversion is simple: go to
its definition and look at the return type. The typedefs for return values are
unique for each function with custom expansion to make it possible to set up an
expand method individually. These typedefs have the format: `<function
name>/<expansion procedure>/<actual type>`. It will be clear from the
`<expansion procedure>` what you are dealing with. Otherwise you shouldn't
really have to know or care about this long type name, the actual type should be
enough.

Another way is to go to
[type-conversion-lists](source/type-conversion-lists.lisp) and see for yourself.
 
I skipped _most_ of the functions listed at https://wiki.libsdl.org/ToDo, which
includes C function wrappers/equivalents (e.g. `SDL_sscanf`). Some functions I
wasn't sure about. Some weren't documented. See `hu.dwim.sdl::*skip/core*` for
details. However, I didn't skip the `GameController` functions (they are a
draft) as they had documentation.

Also, `SDL_DequeueAudio` and `SDL_RWwrite` are exceptions: the user passes a
number and they return another number, and if the number returned is less than
the one passed, that's an error and the user calls `SDL_GetError`. I don't think
C2FFI supports this case. Anyway, I redefined these manually with error checks
in [core-extras](core-extras.lisp). I haven't tested them and, in fact, the
current specs are out of date and don't have them at all. Unmodified versions
prefixed with % should be available for these.

**There are many functions, some were picked with regexps, others were picked by
hand, some could've been misjudged: there could have been errors. If something
doesn't work, always make sure to go and check the generated definition along
with the relevant SDL documentation.**

As a precaution, if you generate new specs with new functions in the sense that
they aren't in the conversion lists, you will get warned about them, and if
those functions have unknown abbreviations, you will be told about that as well.

#### Undecided / Unfinished / Unclear

wiki is unclear on these:
- `SDL_AudioStreamFlush` : int, no mention of error
- `SDL_GetAudioDeviceStatus` : wiki shows gibberish
- `SDL_SIMDGetAlignment` : size_t, but wiki has no error info
- `SDL_DuplicateSurface` : no page on wiki
- `SDL_JoystickGetType` : no error info on wiki

TODO these return structs that sometimes indicate an error condition:
- `SDL_GameControllerGetBindForButton` : returns a struct, but wiki assumes enum
- `SDL_GameControllerGetBindForAxis` : returns a struct, but wiki assumes enum
- `SDL_JoystickGetGUID`
- `SDL_JoystickGetDeviceGUID`
 
### Convenience macros and functions

#### `<function-name>*`: Convenience functions for passed return values

Instead of allocating foreign objects to pass to a function for value return,
make a wrapping to do it for you. For example,`ttf-size-text` takes pointers to
width and height variables which it will set, our goal is to make a function
`ttf-size-text*` that does it for us, eliminating the need for these arguments:

```
(with-foreign-objects ((w :int) (h :int))
  (ttf-size-text font text w h)
  (values (mem-ref w :int) (mem-ref h :int)))
```
becomes simply

```
(ttf-size-text* font text)
```

For the list of functions for which this is done (and for a place to add more),
see [other-lists.lisp](source/other-lists.lisp).

#### `make-<struct-name>` and `make*<struct-name>`: construction macros

In place of `cffi:foreign-alloc` + `cffi:with-foreign-slots` and `setf`'ing the
slots yourself, you can just do this instead:

```
(let ((r (sdl:make-rect :x 0 :y 0 :w 10 :h 10)))
  ;; ...
  (cffi:foreign-free r))
```
or this, if you want to leave some slots uninitialized:
 
```
(let ((r (sdl:make*rect)))
  ;; ...
  (cffi:foreign-free r))
```

#### `with-<struct-name>` and `with*<struct-name>`: scoped construction macros

The following are like the make constructs above, but `cffi:foreign-free` is
done automatically:
 
```
(sdl:with-rect (r :x 0 :y 0 :w 10 :h 10)
  ;; ...
  )
```

```
(sdl:with*rect (r)
  ;; ...
  )
```
 
#### `with-<struct-name>*` and `with*<struct-name>*`

These are just like `with-<struct-name>` and `with*<struct-name>` except they
are for multiple forms:

``` 
(sdl:with-point* ((point-a :x 0 :y 0)
                  (point-b :x 5 :y 5))
  ;; ...
  )
```

#### `with-<SLD_Create<rest of the function name>>`

Example: `(with-window w (<args to create-window>) <body>)` binds `w` to the
result of `create-window`, executes the body in `unwind-protect` clause, which
finishes with a call to `destroy-window`.

The name of the macro is built by throwing away the `SDL_Create` part of the
function, except in these cases:
- `SDL_GL_CreateContext` --> `with-gl-context`
- `SDL_Metal_CreateView` --> `with-metal-view`.

See [other-lists.lisp](source/other-lists.lisp) for the list of
these macros.
 
#### `with-sdl-slots` and `with-sdl-slots*`

This macro lets you easily access slots of a struct. Here's an example:

```
(defpackage #:sdl2-example
  (:use :cl)
  (:local-nicknames (sdl hu.dwim.sdl/core))
  (:import-from #:hu.dwim.sdl #:with-sdl-slots #:with-sdl-slots*))

(in-package :sdl2-example)

(sdl:with-point (p :x 0 :y 1)
  (with-sdl-slots ((x y) p point)
    (values x y))) ; => 0, 1
```

Just like with `cffi:with-foreign-slots`, you can use `(:pointer <type>)`
syntax:

```
(sdl:with-point (p :x 0 :y 1)
  (with-sdl-slots (((x0 x) (y0 (:pointer y))) p point)
    (values x0 y0))) ; => 0, #.(SB-SYS:INT-SAP #X7F9AEE437FF4)
```

Multiplexed version is also available:

```
(sdl:with-point* ((point-a :x 0 :y 1)
                  (point-b :x 2 :y 3))
  (with-sdl-slots* ((((x0 x) (y0 y)) point-a point)
                    (((x1 x) (y1 y)) point-b point))
    (values x0 y0 x1 y1))) ; => 0, 1, 2, 3
```

Note that with `cffi:with-foreign-slots` you would have to name the package like
this:
 
```
(sdl:with-point (a :x 0 :y 5)
  (cffi:with-foreign-slots ((sdl:x sdl:y) a (:struct sdl:rect))
    (values sdl:x sdl:y)))
```

In contrast, `with-sdl-slots` finds `rect` in one of the sdl packages at
macroexpansion time, assumes `x` and `y` to be in the package where `rect` was
found and sets up a `symbol-macrolet` to replace `x` with `hu.dwim.sdl/core:x`
and `y` with `hu.dwim.sdl/core:y`.

### Example

The following example opens a window and shows a rectangle for two seconds:
 
``` 
(defpackage #:sdl2-example
  (:use :cl)
  (:local-nicknames (sdl hu.dwim.sdl/core)))

(in-package :sdl2-example)

(progn
  (sdl:init sdl:+init-video+)
  (sdl:with-window window ("a square"
                           sdl:+windowpos-undefined+ sdl:+windowpos-undefined+
                           0 0
                           (logior sdl:+window-resizable+ sdl:+window-fullscreen-desktop+))
    (sdl:with-renderer renderer (window -1 sdl:+renderer-accelerated+)
      (dotimes (time 120)
        ;; clear
        (sdl:set-render-draw-color renderer 255 255 255 255)
        (sdl:render-clear renderer)
        ;; draw a rectangle
        (sdl:set-render-draw-color renderer 0 0 0 255)
        (multiple-value-bind (w h) (sdl:get-window-size* window)
          (sdl:with-rect (rect :x (- (floor w 2) 100)
                               :y (- (floor h 2) 100)
                               :w 200
                               :h 200)
            (sdl:render-draw-rect renderer rect)))
        ;; show
        (sdl:render-present renderer)
        (sdl:delay 16))))
  (sdl:quit))
```

### Status

**API is not frozen.**

I think everything is pretty solid, but there may be errors in judgement about
the functions in the conversion lists: there could be some stray functions that
may not really need error checking or a bool conversion, or, on the contrary,
those that may. If there's a clear cut case of such an error that you find,
don't rely on it, it will be likely considered a bug and will be fixed. So,
please, report dubious cases.

All the breaking changes will be listed in this file.

#### Problems / Known Issues

- Definitions for `SDL_DequeueAudio` and `SDL_RWwrite` were done manually to add
  special cases of error checking (see above about them), but I didn't test
  them. The original definitions should be available with % prefix, though.
- This fork relies on support prologue code pull request being merged in
  `cffi`. The change is only a few lines of code and shouldn't be a problem.
- `set-window-shape` issues warnings on `+invalid-shape-argument+` and
  `+nonshapeable-window+`, because these are list later than the function (and
  are needed for enum error checking) in the c2ffi output.  See
  https://github.com/rpav/c2ffi/issues/28 for a feature request on this.
- The unfinished/undecide list of functions listed above.


### Alternative projects

- [cl-sdl2](https://github.com/lispgames/cl-sdl2)
- [cl-sdl2-ttf](https://github.com/Failproofshark/cl-sdl2-ttf)
- [cl-sdl2-gfx](https://github.com/Zulu-Inuoe/cl-sdl2-gfx)
- [sdl2-gfx](https://github.com/mabragor/sdl2-gfx)
- [cl-sdl2-image](https://github.com/lispgames/cl-sdl2-image)

To add some details to the *How* section below, the libraries listed above all
use [cl-autowrap](https://github.com/rpav/cl-autowrap) and this library is using
[cffi](https://common-lisp.net/project/cffi/) with its ASDF-integrated
c2ffi. They both use the `c2ffi` utility to generate the specs, but to the best
of my knowledge, `cffi` has these advantages:
- it generates a file which you can "goto definition", while `cl-autowrap`
  provides a macro, which isn't so easy to work with, and
- it provides a way to build compiler-macro return value expansions (used
  extensively in this project for return value conversion and checking).

## What

It's a Common Lisp [FFI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_function_interface)
for http://libsdl.org/ (SDL2).

## Why

The alternative projects are partial, while this one uses
[cffi/c2ffi](https://github.com/cffi/cffi) to automatically generate
the complete CFFI bindings for the various subsystems of
[SDL2](http://libsdl.org/).

It only requires vanilla CFFI when used, no extra dependencies.

## Who

Written by [attila@lendvai.name](mailto:attila@lendvai.name).

## Where

The primary communication channel is the facilities on
[the project's GitHub page](https://github.com/hu-dwim/hu.dwim.sdl).

## How

This project uses [CFFI/C2FFI](https://github.com/cffi/cffi), whose
ASDF extension does two things:

1. When needed, it can invoke [c2ffi](https://github.com/rpav/c2ffi)
to process a C header file and emit a c2ffi spec file (a json file)
that contains every detail needed to generate an FFI for a given
platform. But yours truely has run this phase, and checked in the
resulting spec files into the [c2ffi-spec/](c2ffi-spec/)
directory. This way users don't need to have a working c2ffi
executable, nor the SDL dev headers installed.

2. Based on the above mentioned spec file, it generates the CFFI forms
into a lisp file (placed next to the spec file), and continues as if
it was just another lisp file written by hand. (These lisp files could
also be committed into the repo, but for now they are not, because
their regeneration is automatic and painless.)

## Status

Has FFI for `sdl.h`, `sdl-gfx.h`, `sdl-ttf.h`, and `sdl-image.h`.
